DOC: Array API support (#1918)
intel/scikit-learn-intelex: doc/sources/array_api.rst

then fitted attributes will be on the CPU and `numpy.ndarray` data format.

DPCTL usm_ndarrays
------------------
Here is an example code to demonstrate how to use `dpctl <https://intelpython.github.io/dpctl/latest/index.html>`__
arrays to run `RandomForestClassifier` on a GPU witout `config_context(array_api_dispatch=True)`:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/sklearnex/random_forest_classifier_dpctl.py
	   :language: python

As on previous example, if `dpctl <https://intelpython.github.io/dpctl/latest/index.html>`__ Array API namespace was
used for training, then fitted attributes will be on the CPU and `numpy.ndarray` data format.

Use of `array-api-strict`
-------------------------

Here is an example code to demonstrate how to use `array-api-strict <https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-strict>`__
arrays to run `DBSCAN`.

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/sklearnex/dbscan_array_api.py
	   :language: python

Support for Array API-compatible inputs
=======================================
All patched estimators, metrics, tools and non-scikit-learn estimators functionally support Array API.

> Functionally all input and output data have the same data format type.

Reviewer: I don't quite understand what this means. Could you expand a bit?

Author: I have updated documentation for this section. Is it still unclear? If there something that I should cover?

For all array inputs except SYCL USM arrays `dpnp's <https://github.com/IntelPython/dpnp>`__ ndarray and

> `Data Parallel Control usm_ndarray <https://intelpython.github.io/dpctl/latest/index.html>`__ all computation
> will be only accomplished on CPU unless specified by a config_context with an available GPU device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Data Parallel Control usm_ndarray <https://intelpython.github.io/dpctl/latest/index.html>`__ all computations
will be performed only on CPU unless specified by a config_context with an available GPU device.
```

Author: Why this suggestion is needed?

Reviewer: Not strictly needed, but I'd say it sounds more grammatical.

Stock scikit-learn uses `config_context(array_api_dispatch=True)` for enabling Array API `support <https://scikit-learn.org/1.5/modules/array_api.html>`__.

> If `array_api_dispatch` enabled and the installed Scikit-Learn version supports array API, then the original
> inputs are used for when falling back to Scikit-Learn functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `array_api_dispatch` is enabled and the installed Scikit-Learn version supports array API, then the original
inputs are used when falling back to Scikit-Learn functionality.
```

.. * you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.. * You may obtain a copy of the License at
.. *
.. *     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
.. *
.. * Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
.. * distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
.. * WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
.. * See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
.. * limitations under the License.
.. *******************************************************************************/

.. _array_api:

=================
Array API support
=================
The `Array API <https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/>`_ specification defines
a standard API for all array manipulation libraries with a NumPy-like API.
Intel(R) Extension for Scikit-Learn doesn't require
`array-api-compat <https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-compat>`__ to be installed for
functional support of the array API standard.
In the current implementation, the functional support of array api follows the functional
support of different array or DataFrame inputs and does not modify the precision of the input and

> output data formats unless necessary. Any array API input data provided will be converted to host

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
output data formats unless necessary. Any array API input will be converted to host
```

numpy.ndarrays and all internal manipulations with data will be done with these representations of
the input data. DPNP's 'ndarray' and Data Parallel Control's 'usm_ndarray' have special handling
requirements that are described in the relevant section of this document. Output values will in
all relevant cases match the input data format.

.. note::
    Currently, only `array-api-strict <https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-strict>`__,
    `dpctl <https://intelpython.github.io/dpctl/latest/index.html>`__, `dpnp <https://github.com/IntelPython/dpnp>`__
    and `numpy <https://numpy.org/>`__ are known to work with sklearnex estimators.
.. note::
    Stock Scikit-learn’s array API support requires `array-api-compat <https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-compat>`__ to be installed.

Support for DPNP and DPCTL
==========================

> The functional support of input data for sklearnex estimators also extended for non-array API
> compliant array formats not covered by array-api-compat. These include SYCL USM arrays

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The functional support of input data for sklearnex estimators also extended for SYCL USM array types. These include
```

Author: It contradicts with the previous suggestion, but ok will apply :)

`dpnp's <https://github.com/IntelPython/dpnp>`__ ndarray and
`Data Parallel Control usm_ndarray <https://intelpython.github.io/dpctl/latest/index.html>`__.
DPNP ndarray and Data Parallel Control usm_ndarray contain SYCL contexts which can be used for
`sklearnex` device offloading.

.. note::
    Current support for DPNP and DPCTL usm_ndarray data can be copied and moved to and from device in sklearnex and have
    impacts on memory utilization.

> DPCTL or DPNP inputs doesn't require to use `config_context(target_offload=device)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DPCTL or DPNP inputs are not required to use `config_context(target_offload=device)`.
```

`sklearnex` will use input usm_ndarray sycl context for device offloading.

.. note::
    As DPCTL or DPNP inputs contain SYCL contexts, they do not require `config_context(target_offload=device)`.
    However, the use of `config_context`` will override the contained SYCL context and will force movement
    of data to the targeted device.

Example usage
=============

DPNP ndarrays
-------------

Here is an example code to demonstrate how to use `dpnp <https://github.com/IntelPython/dpnp>`__ arrays to

> run `RandomForestRegressor` on a GPU witout ```config_context(array_api_dispatch=True)```:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
run `RandomForestRegressor` on a GPU without ```config_context(array_api_dispatch=True)```:
```

arrays to run `RandomForestClassifier` on a GPU witout `config_context(array_api_dispatch=True)`:

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/sklearnex/random_forest_classifier_dpctl.py
	   :language: python

As on previous example, if `dpctl <https://intelpython.github.io/dpctl/latest/index.html>`__ Array API namespace was
used for training, then fitted attributes will be on the CPU and `numpy.ndarray` data format.

Use of `array-api-strict`
-------------------------

Here is an example code to demonstrate how to use `array-api-strict <https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-strict>`__
arrays to run `DBSCAN`.

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/sklearnex/dbscan_array_api.py
	   :language: python

Support for Array API-compatible inputs
=======================================
All patched estimators, metrics, tools and non-scikit-learn estimators functionally support Array API.
Functionally all input and output data have the same data format type.
For all array inputs except SYCL USM arrays `dpnp's <https://github.com/IntelPython/dpnp>`__ ndarray and
`Data Parallel Control usm_ndarray <https://intelpython.github.io/dpctl/latest/index.html>`__ all computation

> will be only accomplished on CPU.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will be only accomplished on CPU unless specified by a config_context with an available GPU device.
```

> Stock scikit-learn uses `config_context(array_api_dispatch=True)` for enabling Array API `support <https://scikit-learn.org/1.5/modules/array_api.html>`__.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scikit-learn uses `config_context(array_api_dispatch=True)` for enabling Array API `support <https://scikit-learn.org/1.5/modules/array_api.html>`__.
```

Reviewer 2: Double check capitalization of Scikit-learn vs Scikit-Learn in this file, it could be that my suggestions to 'Scikit-Learn' are incorrect, but they need to be consistent.

Author: I would like to leave stock prefix here just for the context.
Everywhere in our docs and repository `Scikit-learn` is used. If updates are required then that alignment could be done as a follow up in separate PR

Reviewer 2: What does stock mean in this case?

Author: Stock means base or original scikit-learn: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/

I am referencing other to other parts of our docs where this is used.

https://github.com/intel/scikit-learn-intelex/blob/b077b6c35c5fb8ff191c9ea4c636cf73964005ba/README.md?plain=1#L91

https://github.com/intel/scikit-learn-intelex/blob/b077b6c35c5fb8ff191c9ea4c636cf73964005ba/README.md?plain=1#L94

https://github.com/intel/scikit-learn-intelex/blob/b077b6c35c5fb8ff191c9ea4c636cf73964005ba/examples/sklearnex/verbose_mode.py#L18

https://github.com/intel/scikit-learn-intelex/blob/b077b6c35c5fb8ff191c9ea4c636cf73964005ba/doc/sources/tutorials.rst#L63

https://github.com/intel/scikit-learn-intelex/blob/b077b6c35c5fb8ff191c9ea4c636cf73964005ba/doc/sources/oneapi-gpu.rst#L64

https://github.com/intel/scikit-learn-intelex/blob/b077b6c35c5fb8ff191c9ea4c636cf73964005ba/doc/sources/kaggle/regression.rst#L21

https://github.com/intel/scikit-learn-intelex/blob/b077b6c35c5fb8ff191c9ea4c636cf73964005ba/doc/sources/quick-start.rst#L166

https://github.com/intel/scikit-learn-intelex/blob/b077b6c35c5fb8ff191c9ea4c636cf73964005ba/doc/sources/kaggle/classification.rst#L21

Also it is used in docstrings everywhere through the repo.

The main goal is to save preeservance of returned inputs data formats for the outputs.

.. note::
    Currently, only `array-api-strict <https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-strict>`__,
    `dpctl <https://intelpython.github.io/dpctl/latest/index.html>`__, `dpnp <https://github.com/IntelPython/dpnp>`__
    and `numpy <https://numpy.org/>`__ are known to work with estimators.
.. note::
    Stock Scikit-learn’s Array API support requires `array-api-compat <https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-compat>`__ to be installed.

Support for DPNP and DPCTL
==========================
The functional support of input data for sklearnex estimators also extended for dpnp.ndarrays,
which are not Array API compliant, and dpctl usm_ndarray, which are array API compliant except
`linalg` module. DPNP and DPCTL usm_ndarray sycl context used for scikit-learn-intelex device
offloading.

.. note::
    Current support for DPNP and DPCTL usm_ndarray doesn't guarantee zero-copy and non-data movement from gpu device
    to host.

DPCTL or DPNP inputs doesn't require to use ```config_context(target_offload=device)```.
`sklearnex` will use input usm_ndarray sycl context for device offloading.

.. note::

>     If ```config_context(target_offload=device)``` enabled for DPCTL or DPNP inputs and device is as a string

Reviewer: Why 3 backticks here but one backtick in the others?

    However, the use of `config_context`` will override the contained SYCL context and will force movement
    of data to the targeted device.

Support for Array API-compatible inputs
=======================================
All patched estimators, metrics, tools and non-scikit-learn estimators functionally support Array API standart.
Intel(R) Extension for scikit-Learn preserves input data format for all outputs. For all array inputs except
SYCL USM arrays `dpnp's <https://github.com/IntelPython/dpnp>`__ ndarray and
`Data Parallel Control usm_ndarray <https://intelpython.github.io/dpctl/latest/index.html>`__ all computation
will be only accomplished on CPU unless specified by a `config_context`` with an available GPU device.

Stock scikit-learn uses `config_context(array_api_dispatch=True)` for enabling Array API
`support <https://scikit-learn.org/1.5/modules/array_api.html>`__.
If `array_api_dispatch` is enabled and the installed Scikit-Learn version supports array API, then the original

> inputs are used for when falling back to Scikit-Learn functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
inputs are used when falling back to Scikit-Learn functionality.
```

Here is an example code to demonstrate how to use `array-api-strict <https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-strict>`__
arrays to run `DBSCAN`.

.. literalinclude:: ../../examples/sklearnex/dbscan_array_api.py
	   :language: python

Support for Array API-compatible inputs
=======================================
All patched estimators, metrics, tools and non-scikit-learn estimators functionally support Array API.
Functionally all input and output data have the same data format type.

Stock scikit-learn uses ```config_context(array_api_dispatch=True)``` for enabling Array API `support <https://scikit-learn.org/1.5/modules/array_api.html>`__.
If `array_api_dispatch` enabled and array api is supported for the stock scikit-learn, then raw inputs are used for the fallback.

.. note::
    Stock scikit-learn doesn't support DPCTL usm_ndarray or DPNP ndarray inputs, host numpy copies
    of the inputs data will be used for the fallback cases. This fallback condition will be changed
    in the next versions, depending on the support of Array API standard by DPNP and DPCTL and
    reimplementation of `sklearnex` estimators via Array API.

Planned features
================

> It is planned to implement DBSCAN, PCA and other estimators via Array API for next releases.

Reviewer: I'm not getting the meaning of this one.

Previously it said:
> All patched estimators, metrics, tools and non-scikit-learn estimators functionally support Array API.

What's the difference?

.. ******************************************************************************
.. * Copyright 2024 Intel Corporation
.. *
.. * Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
.. * you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.. * You may obtain a copy of the License at
.. *
.. *     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
.. *
.. * Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
.. * distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
.. * WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
.. * See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
.. * limitations under the License.
.. *******************************************************************************/

.. _array_api:

#################
Array API support
#################
The `Array API <https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/>`_ specification defines
a standard API for all array manipulation libraries with a NumPy-like API.
Intel(R) Extension for Scikit-Learn doesn't require
`array-api-compat <https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-compat>`__ to be installed for

> functional support of Array API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
functional support of the array API standard.
```

> In the current implementation, the functional support of array api is just part of functional
> support of different array or dataframe inputs and tries to leave presecion of the input and
> output data formats. Any array API input data provided will be converted to host numpy.ndarrays

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the current implementation, the functional support of array api follows the functional
support of different array or DataFrame inputs and does not modify the precision of the input and
output data formats unless necessary. Any array API input data provided will be converted to host numpy.ndarrays
```

dataframe is a proper noun in this case (as most refer to a pandas/dask whatever DataFrame)

and all internal manipulations with data will be done with these representations of the input

> data. Work with DPNP.ndarray and DPCTL usm_ndarray has specifics, that is described in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
data. DPNP's 'ndarray' and Data Parallel Control's 'usm_ndarray' have special handling requirements that are described in the
```

> relevant section of this document.
> 
> The main goal is to save preeservance of returned inputs data formats for the outputs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
relevant section of this document. Output values will in all relevant cases match the input data format.
```

.. note::
    Currently, only `array-api-strict <https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-strict>`__,
    `dpctl <https://intelpython.github.io/dpctl/latest/index.html>`__, `dpnp <https://github.com/IntelPython/dpnp>`__

>     and `numpy <https://numpy.org/>`__ are known to work with estimators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    and `numpy <https://numpy.org/>`__ are known to work with sklearnex estimators.
```

.. note::

>     Stock Scikit-learn’s Array API support requires `array-api-compat <https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-compat>`__ to be installed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Stock Scikit-learn’s array API support requires `array-api-compat <https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-compat>`__ to be installed.
```

Support for DPNP and DPCTL
----------------------------------

> The functional support of input data for sklearnex estimators also extended for dpnp.ndarrays,
> which are not Array API compliant, and dpctl usm_ndarray, which are array API compliant except
> `linalg` module. DPNP and DPCTL usm_ndarray sycl context used for scikit-learn-intelex device
> offloading.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The functional support of input data for sklearnex estimators also extended for non-array API compliant array formats not covered by array-api-compat. These include SYCL USM array packages dpnp.ndarray and dpctl.usm_ndarray. DPNP and Data Parallel Control usm_ndarray contain SYCL contexts which can be used for scikit-learn-intelex device
offloading.
```

.. note::

>     Current support for DPNP and DPCTL usm_ndarray doesn't guarantee zero-copy and non-data movement from gpu device

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Current support for DPNP and DPCTL usm_ndarray data can be copied and moved to and from device in sklearnex and have impacts on memory utilization.
```

    to host.

DPCTL or DPNP inputs doesn't require to use ```config_context(target_offload=device)```.
`sklearnex` will use input usm_ndarray sycl context for device offloading.

> .. note::
>     If ```config_context(target_offload=device)``` enabled for DPCTL or DPNP inputs and device is as a string
>     for the device primarily used to perform computations, returned output will have different sycl queue for
>     the device. `target_offload` provided with `config_context` will be used to perform computations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. note::
As DPCTL or DPNP inputs contain SYCL contexts, they do not require ```config_context(target_offload=device)```. However, the use of config_context
will override the contained SYCL context and will force movement of data to the targeted device.
```

> .. automodule:: examples/sklearnex/random_forest_regressor_dpnp.py
>   :members:

Author: or 
```suggestion
.. literalinclude:: examples/sklearnex/random_forest_regressor_dpnp.py
   :language: python
```

Author: Move to Example usage section

Example usage
----------------------------------
TBD

Support for Array API-compatible inputs
----------------------------------
All patched estimators, metrics, tools and non-scikit-learn estimators functionally support Array API.

> Functionally all input and output data have the same data format type.

Reviewer 2: We should note here that in some cases (daal4py inherited estimators/methods) that computation will be only accomplished on cpu (or something to that effect).

Author: added. Please see https://github.com/intel/scikit-learn-intelex/pull/1918/commits/c79b8182953ad7cc7e12b06805e3f8edb7b650f8

Stock scikit-learn uses ```config_context(array_api_dispatch=True)``` for enabling Array API `support <https://scikit-learn.org/1.5/modules/array_api.html>`__.

> If `array_api_dispatch` enabled and array api is supported for the stock scikit-learn, then raw inputs are used for the fallback.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If `array_api_dispatch` enabled and the installed Scikit-Learn version supports array API, then the original inputs are used for when falling back to Scikit-Learn functionality.
```

.. note::

>     Stock scikit-learn doesn't support DPCTL usm_ndarray or DPNP ndarray inputs, host numpy copies

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Data Parallel Control usm_ndarray or DPNP ndarray inputs will use host numpy data copies when falling back to Scikit-Learn since they are not array API compliant.
```

>     of the inputs data will be used for the fallback cases. This fallback condition will be changed

Reviewer 2: Lets remove the discussion of future support and when it happens we can say its a new feature instead with a note of how support has changed.

    in the next versions, depending on the support of Array API standard by DPNP and DPCTL and
    reimplementation of `sklearnex` estimators via Array API.

Planned features
----------------------------------

> TBD

Reviewer 2: TBD is too informal here, could write it out?

Author: @icfaust PR was marked as DRAFT
